docs/modules/ROOT/pages/quickstart.adoc, before:

= Quickstart

These steps will get you up and going with using Pkl and Go.

== 1. Install dependencies

Your project will need to include pkl-go as a dependency:

[source,bash]
----
go get github.com/apple/pkl-go
----

If you are using xref:codegen.adoc[code generation], install the pkl-gen-go binary, either via `go install` or with a direct download.

The binaries are available as assets on our link:https://github.com/apple/pkl-go/releases/tag/v{version}/[GitHub release].

[source,bash,subs="+attributes"]
----
# via go install
go install github.com/apple/pkl-go/cmd/pkl-gen-go@v{version}

# via curl
# available platforms: macos, linux-amd64, and linux-aarch64
curl -L -o pkl-gen-go github.com/apple/pkl-go/releases/download/v{version}/pkl-gen-go-<platform>.bin
chmod +x pkl-gen-go
----

Also, ensure that Pkl is xref:main:pkl-cli:index.adoc#installation[installed on your machine].

== 2. Define a Pkl schema

Create a new Pkl file in the directory of your choice, and annotate it with the `@go.Package` annotation.
The `name` property in the annotation is the Go import path for the generated configuration file.

In this example, the file is placed into `pkl/AppConfig.pkl`, and the Go package name for this Pkl module is
`github.com/myorg/myteam/appconfig`.

.pkl/AppConfig.pkl
[source,pkl,subs="+attributes"]
----
@go.Package { name = "github.com/myorg/myteam/appconfig" }
module myorg.myteam.AppConfig

import "package://pkg.pkl-lang.org/pkl-go/pkl.golang@{version}#/go.pkl" // <1>

/// The hostname of this application.
host: String

/// The port to listen on.
port: UInt16
----
<1> Used for the `@go.Package` annotation.

== 3. Generate Go source code

With a schema defined, generate Go source code for it.

Code generation is done via the `pkl-gen-go` CLI. To install:

[source,bash]
----
go install github.com/apple/pkl-go/cmd/pkl-gen-go@v{version}
----

In our example, Go sources can be generated using the following command:

[source,bash]
----
pkl-gen-go pkl/AppConfig.pkl --base-path github.com/myorg/myteam
----

The `--base-path` causes the code generator to place the Go source files in a relative path.

If the `--base-path` argument is omitted, the code generator will also look for a `go.mod` file for the base path, as well as within the
xref:codegen.adoc#settings-file[settings file].

In this example, the Go package name of our Pkl module is `github.com/myorg/myteam/appconfig`, and the base path
is `github.com/myorg/myteam`. Therefore, the generated Go files will be placed into the `appconfig` directory.

For more details on how to control code generation, consult `pkl-gen-go --help`.

== 4. Evaluate Pkl configuration data in Go

With the above scaffolding set up, evaluate Pkl configuration data in Go.

First, define some configuration that uses the Pkl schema.

In our example, we create a file at path `pkl/local/appConfig.pkl`. We imagine that we are defining configuration for a server running in a local environment, and would likewise place other environments in sibling directories; e.g. `pkl/int/appConfig.pkl` and `pkl/prod/appConfig.pkl`.

.pkl/local/appConfig.pkl
[source,pkl]
----
amends "../AppConfig.pkl"

host = "localhost"

port = 5939
----

Once defined, evaluate the Pkl module into Go.

.cmd/main.go
[source,go]
----
package main

import (
	"context"
	"fmt"

	"github.com/myorg/myteam/appconfig"
)

func main() {
	cfg, err := appconfig.LoadFromPath(context.Background(), "pkl/local/appConfig.pkl")
	if err != nil {
		panic(err)
	}
	fmt.Printf("I'm running on host %s\n", cfg.Host)
}
----

Commit message:

Document use of `go tool` for running `pkl-gen-go`

docs/modules/ROOT/pages/quickstart.adoc, after:

= Quickstart

These steps will get you up and going with using Pkl and Go.

== 1. Install dependencies

Your project will need to include pkl-go as a dependency:

[source,bash]
----
go get github.com/apple/pkl-go
----

If you are using xref:codegen.adoc[code generation], use `go tool` to run `pkl-gen-go`:

[source,bash,subs="+attributes"]
----
go get -tool github.com/apple/pkl-go/cmd/pkl-gen-go
----

Also, ensure that the latest Pkl release is xref:main:pkl-cli:index.adoc#installation[installed on your machine].

The `pkl-gen-go` binary can also be installed directly, either via `go install`, or with a direct download.
If opting for direct installation, omit the `go tool` from commands in this document.
Using `go tool` is preferred because it keeps the version of `pkl-gen-go` in sync with `pkl-go`.

The binaries are available as assets on our link:https://github.com/apple/pkl-go/releases/tag/v{version}/[GitHub release].

[source,bash,subs="+attributes"]
----
# via go install
go install github.com/apple/pkl-go/cmd/pkl-gen-go@v{version}

# via curl
# available platforms: macos, linux-amd64, and linux-aarch64
curl -L -o pkl-gen-go github.com/apple/pkl-go/releases/download/v{version}/pkl-gen-go-<platform>.bin
chmod +x pkl-gen-go
----

== 2. Define a Pkl schema

Create a new Pkl file in the directory of your choice, and annotate it with the `@go.Package` annotation.
The `name` property in the annotation is the Go import path for the generated configuration file.

In this example, the file is placed into `pkl/AppConfig.pkl`, and the Go package name for this Pkl module is
`github.com/myorg/myteam/appconfig`.

.pkl/AppConfig.pkl
[source,pkl,subs="+attributes"]
----
@go.Package { name = "github.com/myorg/myteam/appconfig" }
module myorg.myteam.AppConfig

import "package://pkg.pkl-lang.org/pkl-go/pkl.golang@{version}#/go.pkl" // <1>

/// The hostname of this application.
host: String

/// The port to listen on.
port: UInt16
----
<1> Used for the `@go.Package` annotation.

== 3. Generate Go source code

With a schema defined, generate Go source code for it.

Code generation is done via the `pkl-gen-go` CLI.

In our example, Go sources can be generated using the following command:

[source,bash]
----
go tool pkl-gen-go pkl/AppConfig.pkl --base-path github.com/myorg/myteam
----

The `--base-path` causes the code generator to place the Go source files in a relative path.

If the `--base-path` argument is omitted, the code generator will also look for a `go.mod` file for the base path, as well as within the
xref:codegen.adoc#settings-file[settings file].

In this example, the Go package name of our Pkl module is `github.com/myorg/myteam/appconfig`, and the base path
is `github.com/myorg/myteam`. Therefore, the generated Go files will be placed into the `appconfig` directory.

For more details on how to control code generation, consult `go tool pkl-gen-go --help`.

== 4. Evaluate Pkl configuration data in Go

With the above scaffolding set up, evaluate Pkl configuration data in Go.

First, define some configuration that uses the Pkl schema.

In our example, we create a file at path `pkl/local/appConfig.pkl`. We imagine that we are defining configuration for a server running in a local environment, and would likewise place other environments in sibling directories; e.g. `pkl/int/appConfig.pkl` and `pkl/prod/appConfig.pkl`.

.pkl/local/appConfig.pkl
[source,pkl]
----
amends "../AppConfig.pkl"

host = "localhost"

port = 5939
----

Once defined, evaluate the Pkl module into Go.

.cmd/main.go
[source,go]
----
package main

import (
	"context"
	"fmt"

	"github.com/myorg/myteam/appconfig"
)

func main() {
	cfg, err := appconfig.LoadFromPath(context.Background(), "pkl/local/appConfig.pkl")
	if err != nil {
		panic(err)
	}
	fmt.Printf("I'm running on host %s\n", cfg.Host)
}
----
